# **Risk Measures**

## **Value at Risk**

The **Value at Risk** (VaR) of a random variable is simply the **percentile** of its distribution. It might seem redundant, but it is simply a **business application** of the mathematical concept of percentiles.

$$
    \text{VaR}_{p}(X) = F^{-1}(p)
$$

!!! Warning

    It is a common mistake when in a rush to confuse Var and VaR together as they look extremely similar. Always read the question properly!

Its intepretation changes depending on what the distribution is measuring:

* **Loss Distribution**: Large $p$, probability of obtaining a **loss larger than VaR** is $(1-p)$
* **Gain Distribution**: Small $p$, probability of obtaining a **return smaller than VaR** is $p$
* Both define the thresholds for a "bad" situation

For the remainder of this section, whenever we reference VaR, we refer to a loss distribution unless stated otherwise.

## **Tail Value at Risk**

The **Tail Value at Risk** (TVaR) of a random variable is the **expected value** of the distribution, given that the distribution exceeds the VaR. This is why it is also known as the **Conditional Tail Expectation** (CTE).

It is intepreted as the **average gain/loss** if the amount is smaller/larger than the VaR; if the threshold is crossed.

$$
\begin{aligned}
    \text{TVaR}(X)
    &= E[X \mid X \gt \text{VaR}_{p}(X)] \\
    &= \frac{\int^{\infty}_{\text{VaR}_{p}(X)} x \cdot f(x)}{P(X \gt \text{VaR}_{p}(X))} \\
\end{aligned}
$$

Alternatively, it can be simplified by making use of the **Excess Loss Variable** from exam FAM-S:

$$
\begin{aligned}
    \text{TVaR}(X)
    &= E[X \mid X \gt \text{VaR}_{p}(X)] \\
    &= E[X - \text{VaR}_{p}(X) \mid X \gt \text{VaR}_{p}(X)] + \text{VaR}_{p}(X) \\
    &= \frac{E(X) - E[X \land \text{VaR}_{p}(X)]}{P[X \gt \text{VaR}_{p}(X)]} + \text{VaR}_{p}(X)
\end{aligned}
$$

This formula is not only convenient because there is no need for integration, but because a formula for the limited loss variable is provided in the formula sheets.

!!! Note

    Recall that for a policy with a deductible $d$, the payment of the insurer $Y^P$ is represented as:

    $$
    \begin{aligned}
        Y^P
        &= Y^L \mid Y^L \gt 0 \\
        &= X - d \mid X \gt d
    \end{aligned}
    $$

    The expectation can is calculated as:

    $$
    \begin{aligned}
        E \left(Y^P \right)
        &= \frac{E \left(Y^L \right)}{P(X \gt d)} \\
        &= \frac{E(X) - E(X \land d)}{P(X \gt d)}
    \end{aligned}
    $$

## **Coherence**

One way of determining whether a risk measure is "good" is to consider its **Coherence**. It has four key properties:

The first is **Translation Invariance**. **Linearly increasing** the underlying risk linearly increases the risk measure by the same amount.

$$
    \rho(X+c) = \rho(X) + c
$$

The second is **Positive Homogenity**. **Scaling** the underlying risk scales the risk measure by the same amount.

$$
    rho(cX) = c\rho(X)
$$

The third is **Subadditivity**. Its mathematical definition is that the combination should be **less than the sum of its parts**. In other words, it should recognise **diversification benefits** of multiple risks.

$$
    \rho(X + Y) \le \rho(X) + \rho(Y)
$$

!!! Tip

    Recall the saying - "The whole is greater than the sum of its parts". Subadditivity is the opposite!

The last is known as **Monotonicity**. Its mathematical definition is that it **preserves the order of values**. If one quantity is smaller than another, then its corresponding risk measure should be smaller as well.

$$
\begin{aligned}
    X &\le Y \\
    \rho(X) &\le \rho(Y)
\end{aligned}
$$

The coherence of the most common risk measures can be found below:

<center>

| Coherence | Mean | Variance | VaR | TVaR |
| :-: | :-: | :-: | :-: | :-: |
| **Translation Invariance** | Yes | No | Yes | Yes |
| **Positive Homogenity** | Yes | No | Yes | Yes |
| **Subadditivity** | Yes | No | No | Yes |
| **Monotonicity** | Yes | No | Yes | Yes |
| **Verdict** | Coherent | Not Coherent | Not Coherent | Coherent |

</center>

It is advised to only memorize the results for VaR and TVaR, as the results for mean and variance can be easily determined via first principles.
