# **Long Term Insurance**

Sourced directly from tb because SOA crafts question based on it

## **History**

Life Insurance is a **contract** (Policy) in which the **entity providing the insurance** (Insurer) agrees to pay out a **pre-determined lump sum** (Sum Insured) to the **contract owner** (Policyholder) in the event that a **nominated individual** (Insured) dies while the **contract is valid** (In Force).

!!! Info

    In the UK, "assurance" is used to refer to contracts involving lives while "insurance" is used to refer to contract involving property.

The earliest form of life insurance were **annual policies** that provided coverage one year at a time. The insurer charges premiums such that the premium inflow received each year should approximately **match** the expected benefit outgo each year.

This process is known as **Assessmentism** and is essentially a "pay as you go" form of pricing. As the **insured ages**, the probability of death and hence the expected outgo each year increases, **increasing the premiums**.

!!! Info

    Assessmentism is still used today to price **Group Life Insurance**. It is a year to year life insurance policy that an employer purchases for their employees.

    Unlike individual lives whose probability of making a claim inevitably increases each year, the influx of new members into the group helps to offset and stabilize the cost of insurance, keeping it affordable.

### **Level Premium**

One major problem with this is that the annual increases in premium discouraged policyholders from renewing their contracts. This is counter-intuitive, as they would be **priced out of the insurance contract when it is most needed**.

This led to the development of **Level Premium** contracts, where **premiums are fixed over the term of the contract**, which could now be for multiple years at a time.

This led to a win-win situation: People remain insured at older ages and insurers receive more premiums over a longer period.

However, these contracts resulted in a **higher risks for the insurer**, resulting in the need to develop techniques to model **mortality over multiple years** and incorporate the **time value of money** into their calculations, which led to the traditional actuarial techniques we know today.

### **Insurable Interest**

Another problem was that people were purchasing life insurance on **people that they had no connection** to (often public figures), as a form of gambling on when they would die.

In some cases, this also **incentivised people to hasten the death** of the insured person, which would cause the mortality of the person to be higher than what the insurer expects.

Thus, life insurance the concept of **Insurable Interest** to solve these problems. It states that **policyholders should face a financial loss** in the event of the death of the insured. In other words, life insurance **should NOT leave the insured better off** than if the insured had not died.

!!! Note

    This is similar to the concept of Indemnification of short term insurance.

For the purposes of this exam, it is usually assumed that the **policyholder and the insured are the same person**, thus insurable interest is always fulfilled.

## **Traditional Life Insurance**

There are three traditional forms of life insurance that has existed since its inception: Term, Whole Life & Endowment Insurance.

### **Term Insurance**

Term Insurance covers the insured for a **specified term**, which usually ranges from 10 to 30 years. The policy will make a payout **only if the insured dies within this period**. Regular premium payments must be made **throughout the policy term**, otherwise the policy will cease (lapse).

Premiums for term insurance are very **small relative to the sum insured**. This is because the insurer only expects to **make payouts for a small proportion** of the people who bought the policy; the remaining large proportion will expire without having a payout, thus their premiums can be used to **subsidize the benefits for the small proportion**, allowing premiums to remain low for all.

Term Insurance is mainly used at an individual level for **family protection**. Less commonly, companies can also purchase **term insurance for individual employees**. However, they must be able to prove that the **business has insurable interest** in this employee; thus they are usually **key persons that are vital** to running the company.

!!! Note

    There is a special rider known as the **Family Income Benefit** (FIB) rider that is meant to **further alleviate** the financial strain of a family member dying.

    The rider pays a **yearly benefit** from the time the policyholder dies to the **end of the original contract term**. 

There are a few special kinds of term insurance:

* **Decreasing Term Insurance**: The death **benefit decreases** over the term of the policy, typically set to match how an **outstanding loan** would decrease over time. This ensures that the **loan will be fully paid** in the event of untimely death of the person paying the loan.
* **Renewable Term Insurance**: The policy can be **renewed** at the end of the initial term, **regardless of the health of the insured**.
* **Convertible Term Insurance**: The policy can be **converted** to a **whole life policy** after the initial term, **regardless of the health of the insured**.

Both Renewable and Convertible typically have some **age limit** for when they can be exercised. Similarly, the new policy will always **charge a higher premium** due to the increased age & risk of the insured.

!!! Info

    There is no general use case for renewable and convertible term insurance; it very much depends on the specific needs of individuals.

### **Whole Life Insurance**

As its name suggests, Whole Life covers the insured for their entire life. Since death is inevitable, the policy will make a payout **whenever the insured dies**. Regular premium payments must be made **up till a certain age** (typically 80 or 90), otherwise the policy will lapse.

!!! Note

    The point of whole life insurance is that it will cover the insured no matter what.
    
    There is a **high chance that the poliycholder will not be able to make payment** in their older ages due to the financial strain or inability to manage their own affairs at an older age.

    Thus, if premiums must be payable throughout the entire term of the policy, then most policyholders would be forced to lapse their policy in their later years, which **defeats the purpose** of the policy in the first place.

Since the policy will inevitably make a payout, there is no subsidizing effect on the premiums, causing **premiums to be much higher than term insurance**.

Instead, the insurer **invests the premium** such that the combined amount of the premiums and investment income is sufficient to cover the benefit of the policy. However, it is **hard to predict investment returns** over an extremely long period of time. Thus, most insurers use a **conservative estimate** (low) for interest, resulting in **relatively higher premiums**.

!!! Info

    The eventual difference between the actual interest rate and the assumed interest rate is known as the **Interest Spread**, which forms the **profit and a buffer for adverse experience**.

Whole Life insurance is mainly used by people who **want to leave a bequest** to their children, especially so for wealthier households as life insurance is **not subject to inheritence tax**.

Another fringe use case is for people who want to **cover the expenses related to their deaths** through a whole life policy with relatively low sum insured.

#### **Cash Values**

Most whole life policies also provides a payout when the policy is lapsed, known as its **Cash Value**.

They typically **start out small** and grow to a substantial amount over time, but is still **much less than the sum insured**. This is intuitive, as if the cash values were larger than the death benefit, the policyholder would get more value from surrendering the policy and would thus do so.

!!! Note

    Some legislations require **guaranteed cash values** which are computed using specific assumptions and interest rates.

    For those that do not, the amount can be **non-guaranteed**, which is up to the insurer's discretion. In these cases, the policyholder can pay an extra premium to make the cash values guaranteed.

If the policy does NOT offer cash values, then the premiums from policies that were lapsed can be used to subsidize the benefits of those still in force, resulting in **relatively lower premiums**. This is known as **Lapse Supported Insurance**.

#### **Stranger Owned Insurance**

Instead of lapsing the policy, policyholders can instead **sell the policy to a third party**, known as **Stranger Owned Life Insurance**.

Most commonly, the third party is an investment firm who will purchase the policy for an **amount greater than the cash value, but smaller than sum insured**.

The original policyholder remains the insured while the investment firm is now the policyholder. They are now **responsible for making premium payments and will receive the death benefit** when the insured dies.

The hope is that the eventual **death benefit will outweigh the cost of buying the policy and all future premiums**, allowing them to make a profit. If the insured survives longer than expected, the additional premium payments needed decreases the chance of the company making money.

#### **Participating Insurance**

Insurers typically face the following dilemna:

* **Assume Relatively high interest rate**: Premiums are low but chance for profits are low (high investment risk)
* **Assume Relatively low interest rate**: Premiums are high but chance for profits are high (low investment risk)

The solution that the industry came up was to charge the higher premiums, but **share a portion of the profits** with policyholders if the investments do well. However, the reverse is not true - **losses are NOT shared** with policyholders!

This is known as a **Participating Policy** as the policyholder can *participate* in the profits of the insurer. The share of the profits are known as **Dividends**, which can be passed on to the policyholder in two main ways, based on their choice:

* **Cash Benefits** (It is sometimes **automatically** used to offset premiums, known as **Premium Reductions**)
* **Increased Death Benefits**

!!! Info

    The share of the profits are known as **Bonuses** in the UK.

    Similarly, in the UK, the policyholder has no choice on how to receive their bonuses; it will **always be in the form of increased death benefits**.

    There are two kinds of Bonuses - **Reversionary Bonuses** (RB) and **Terminal Bonuses** (TB).

    RBs increase the death benefit by a **specified percentage** each year, which has three variations:

    * **Simple RB**: Applied to the original sum insured only
    * **Compound RB**: Applied to sum insured and accumulated previous RB
    * **Super Compound**: One rate applied to the original sum and another rate applied to the accumulated previous RB

    RBs are typically credited conservatively; thus the **remainder of the bonus** is distributed when the policy is terminated in the form of TBs.

There are several considerations when deciding between the two methods:

<center>

| Cash Benefits | Increasing Death Benefit |
| :-: | :-: |
| Easy for PH to understand | Hard for PH to understand |
| Flexible | Inflexible |
| Taxable | Not taxable |
| Need to liquidate assets; harms long term performance | No need to liquidate; does not harm performance |
| Expensive to liquidate and disburse | Cheap to maintain |

</center>

Another consideration is **fairness**. If increasing death benefit was chosen, only a **small portion of the increased death benefit** will go to the surrender value. However, if cash was chosen, then the policyholder would have received the full dividend amount.

Regardless of the method chosen, the dividend amount is **non-guaranteed**. When dividends **inevitably fluctuate** over the years, policyholders may get upset that the amount was **lesser than what was projected**. Thus, dividends are **smoothed**; the excess from good performing years is saved to cover the shortfall in poor performing years, **limiting the variation** in dividend amounts.

Participating Insurance is most often used as a **passive long term investment vehicle** with the added benefit of insurance cover.

### **Endowment Insurance**

**Endowment Insurance** is a special type of policy that will make a **payout either on the death** of the policyholder **or on survival till a specified term**, known as the **Maturity Date**, whichever is first.

They generally offer cash values and can be participating. Essentially, it is a hybrid of a term insurance and fixed term investment and is **meant to be an investment product**.

However, it **could not compete with the pure investment options** that became popular in the recent decades due to its low returns and flexibility. As such, it has fallen out of favour and has **evolved into the modern life insurance contracts** that will be discussed later on.

!!! Note

    In many developing nations, Endowment Insurance is still popular as access to other financial products may be limited.

    It is particularly popular for microinsurance and microfinance.

### **Variations**

All the points discussed above are for the barebones version of the contracts. There are several variations that can be made:

**Joint/Multiple** life insurance insures multiple people, paying out on either the **first death, last death or every death** of insured members. It is most commonly used to insure parents or business partners.

Policies that offer cash values can also offer **Policy Loans** which allow the policyholders to **borrow money from the policy's cash value**. If the insured dies, then the death benefit is reduced by the outstanding loan.

Policy loans can be used to help the policyholder **pay for premiums** when they are unable to raise the funds during times of hardship. This increases the chance that the policyholder will continue with the policy, which generally speaking, creates **more opportunities for the insurer to make a profit**.

GCV
Accidental DB

## **Modern Life Insurance**

The design of life insurance has developed in the past few decades resulting in what we know today as **Modern Life Insurance** products.

There are several reasons for this:

* **Increased Competition**: Low rates from traditional products **cannot keep up** with pure investment options
* **Increased Financial Literacy**: People **avoid products that are profitable for insurers** but not very suitable for themselves
* **Changing Demographic**: Jobs have become increasingly short term; thus insurance products need to be **more flexible**

### **Universal Life**

**Universal Life** (UL) contracts are **flexible** whole life contracts with **transparent cash values**.

Premiums paid are deposited into a **notional account** and earn a **credited interest rate** based on investment performance.

!!! Note

    The funds are **not actually seperated** into different account per policyholder; they are still **pooled together into the general account** of the insurer.

    The insurer **keeps track** of how much was deposited and earned by each policyholder and discloses that amount to them.

The **credited rate cannot be 0**, thus the account will never lose value this way. Some products may also offer a **guaranteed minimum rate**, ensuring that the account will always at least grow by a specified amount.

Each period, charges are posted into the account to cover the **cost of insurance** and **policy expenses**. The balance in the account is known as the **Account Value**, which is the cash value that the poliyholder would receive upon lapsing the policy.

!!! Note

    If the policyholder lapses their policy in the first few years of the policy, a **surrender charge** may be applied that reduces the amount received.

    This is to **discourage poliycholders from lapsing their policy too early**, ensuring that the insurer can **recover the high expenses** from setting up the policy.

Another key feature is that it is extremely **flexible**:

* **Death Benefit**: Choose a base amount & whether fixed or increasing
* **Premium**: Free to pay any amount; shortfall is deducted from notional account

The intention is to treat the UL policy as a sort of **savings account** with built in life insurance coverage. It is **expected that they will eventually surrender the policy** for its significant cash value, thus it can be viewed as an updated version of endowment insurance.

!!! Info

    One variation is known as a **Unitized With Profits** (UWP) policy, which is essentially a UL policy with the account value being expressed in terms of **Units**, which are shares in the notional fund, rather than the actual value.

    The investment performance is passed on via an **increase the value of the units**. These policies can also be participating, in which the dividends are passed on in the form of **additional units**.    

### **Equity Linked Insurance**

**Equity Linked Insurance** is the true evolution of endowment insurance as it has the same payment structure (earlier of a fixed term and death).

It has similar features to a UL policy, with some key differences:

* Premiums are invested in an **actual fund**
* **Account value can decrease** if the fund does not perform well
* All benefits are **tied to the account value**

Due to the more volatile nature of this product, the death and maturity benefit are typically **floored at the value of the accumulated premiums** at the time, ensuring that no loss was made from the policy.

!!! Note

    Some policies can also offer a **Guaranteed Minimum Death Benefit** (GMDB) or **Guaranteed Minimum Maturity Benefit** (GMMB) to cover situations where the investments have performed poorly.

    Policyholders are given a choice on these amounts, which allows them to choose if they would like a more **investment or protection oriented policy**.

The main goal of equity linked insurance is to serve as an **investment vehicle** with built in life insurance coverage that can reasonably compete with other pure investment options.

The main form of Equity Linked Insurance sold in the US is known as a **Variable Annuity**. Despite its name, it offers a **lump sum benefit** with the option to **convert into an annuity at maturity**.

Outside of the US, equity linked insurance is often sold as **Unit Linked Insurance**, where the account value is expressed in terms of **Units** of an underlying fund.

!!! Warning

    Although both UWP and ULIP use units, the former is from a **notional fund** while the latter's units are from an **actual fund**.

## **Long Term Health Insurance**

### **Disability Income Insurance**

**Disability Income Insurance** makes **regular payments** to individuals who can **no longer work** due to contracting sickness or disability. Premiums are also suspended during this period.

The benefit payable will always be **lesser than their original income** (50 - 70%) in order to encourage the poliycholder to **return to work as soon as possible**. The amount depends on the extent of the disability:

* **Total Disability**: Unable to work at all; higher benefits
* **Partial Disability**: Able to perform some work; lower benefits
* Amount can also be reduced if receiving **other forms of disability income**
* Amount can also be increased to account for **inflation**

!!! Note

    The definition of disability is important - it could be the inability to peform **any job** or the policyholder's **own job**.

    If it is based on **any job**, then they must be unable to peform any job that that they are **reasonably expected to be able to carry out** given their qualifications.

    Since the **bar is significantly higher** for any job, it will make payouts less frequently and hence is cheaper.

The benefit is usually payable for a **fixed term** (2 or 5 years) or up **till retirement**. Once the payment starts, it will continue till the **earlier of the recovery of the policyholder or the end of the term**.

Regardless, payments only start after an initial **Elimination Period** (30 - 365 days) has finished since being afflicted with the disability. This is to allow the policyholder to first seek treatment. If the disability persists after that, then the policy will begin payments.

!!! Note

    For shorter terms, the policy can make **another series of payouts** if the policyholder becomes afflicted with another disability again later on.

    However, if the second disability **occurs too soon** to the first, then they will be considered as the same and will cumulatively only make payouts equal to the benefit term.

    The threshold for what consitutes as being "too soon" is known as the **Off Period**, which defines how long two disabilities must be to be considered seperate.

### **Long Term Care Insurance**

**Long Term Care Insurance** makes regular payments to individuals who **require long term care** (LTC). Premiums are also suspended during this period.

The definition of requiring LTC usually refers to the **inability** to perform two or more **Activities of Daily Living** (ADL):

* Bathing
* Dressing
* Eating (NOT COOKING!)
* Toileting
* Continence
* Transferring
* The inability to perform any of the above must be certified by a medical professional

Similar to disability income, the payment term could be fixed or indefinite, subject to an **initial elimintation period** and **off period for subsequent sickness**.

LTC insurance can also be combined with insurance to create interesting payout mechanisms:

* **Return Of Premium**: If the LTC benefits paid out are lesser than the total premiums, then the remainder is **added to the death benefit** of the policy
* **Accelerated Benefit**: The **death benefit is accelerated** and paid under the LTC instead OR the **LTC benefit is accelerated** and paid under the death benefit instead, **whichever happens first**

### **Critical Illness Insurance**

**Critical Illness Insurance** pays a lump sum on diagnosis of a **critical illness** (CI). They can either be whole life or for a fixed term.

Each insurer has a different definition for CI; but most include heart attack, stroke, major organ failure and most forms of cancer.

Unlike the previous two insurance contracts, the **policy expires once a payout is made**; a second critical illness will not be covered.

CI insurance can also be combined with life insurance via a **rider** to offer an **accelerated death benefit**, which pays out **all or a portion of the death benefit** when diagnosed with a critical illness, on top of the CI claims.

Intuitively, if all of the death benefit is accelerated, then the policy terminates. If only partially accelerated, then the policy persists and the remainder is paid out on the eventual death of the insured.

!!! Note

    When diagnosed with a critical illness, the policyholder may need extra funds to support their treatment. They may be incentivised to sell their policy to a third party to extract greater value from it.

    This sale is known as **Viatical Settlement**. Investment companies are willing to buy these policies as the probability of death is extremely high, ensuring that they earn a profit.

    This rider helps to alleviate that problem by paying out the full amount to the policyholder, reducing the need for these viatical settlement.

## **Pensions**

### **Defined Benefit Pensions**

**Defined Benefit (DB) Pensions** work similar to annuities that pay a fixed amount each period based on a formula:

$$
    \text{Benefit} = \text{Accrual Rate} \cdot \text{Salary} \cdot \text{Years of employment}
$$

Employers and employees contribute into an **internal fund** which earns interest.

The fund should, on average, be sufficient to cover the above defined benefits of their employees when they retire.

!!! Warning

    This does NOT mean that the benefit is dependent on the performance of the fund.

    If the fund performs well, then the amount that the employee and employers contribute is reduced, but the **benefit remains the same**.

Some employers may allow employees who leave the company to withdraw their pension at a **deferred amount** to either use as a lump sum or invest in the pension plan of the new employer.

### **Defined Contribution Pensions**

**Defined Contribution (DC) Pensions** work similar to a bank account where the employers and employees pay a pre-determined amount into an **external fund** which earns interest (EG. 401k).

When the employee leaves the company or retires, they fund value is available to them in a lump sum. They have the **flexibility** to live directly off the fund amount or purchase an annuity.

## **Special Arrangements**

### **Continuting Care Retirement Communities**

**Continuing Care Retirement Communities** (CCRC) are residential facilities that provide personal and medical support to the elderly (~80).

!!! Info

    There are four types of CCRCs:

    1. **Independent Living Units**: Minimal support
    2. **Assisted Living Units**: Non-medical support for ADLs
    3. **Skilled Nursing Facility**: Medical support
    4. **Memory Care Units**: For dementia or other cognitive impairments

The cost of enrolling in a CCRC is a combination of an **upfront entry fee and a monthly charge**. In exchange, the CCRC provides all support without any future cost.

This is essentially a **form of insurance** as the risk of healthcare cost is being transferred from the eldery to the CCRC.

<center>

| **Full Life Care** | **Modified Life Care** | **Fee for Service** |
| :-: | :-: | :-: |
| High upfront fee | Medium upfront fee | Low upfront fee |
| High monthly fee | Medium monthly fee | Low monthly fee |
| No further charges | Charges on select services | Charges on all services |
| Healthy elderly  | Less healthy elderly | Sick elderly |

</center>

### **Structured Settlements**

Structured Settlements

## **Other Insurance Concepts**

### **Types of Insurers**

There are two main types of insurance companies:

<center>

| **Mutual Insurer** | **Proprietary Insurer** |
| :-: | :-: |
| No shareholders | Has shareholders |
| Only with-profit policyholders | Has with-profit policyholders |
| Profits distributed entirely to PH | Profits split in some pre-determined proportion |

</center>

Mutual insurers have the **advantage in marketing** as it is easy to gain new customers by advertising that they will gain 100% of the profits.

However, propietary insurers have an easier access to capital and higher operating efficiency, due to their clearer corporate structures.

As such, most mutual insurers have **demutualized** to become propietary ones by issuing shares or cash to the with profit policyholders.

### **Distribution**

Intermediaries play an important role in the distribution

Paid through commissions, percentage of the premium paid some are fee abased or salary based

F2F sales focus on higher wealth individuals

Trend towards direct marketing, online sales or TV
less wealthy
Focus is pre need insurance or straightforward insurance

### **Underwriting**

The premium charged depends on the risk level of the insured, which is determined based on a few **rating factors** (EG. Age, Gender, Smoking, Occupation etc).

The process of **collecting and evaluating** this information is known as **Underwriting**. Prospective policyholders are typically split into four categories based on the information given:

* **Preferred Lives**: Low Mortality risk; insurable at **standard rates**
* **Normal Lives**: Normal mortality risk; insurable at **standard rates**
* **Rated Lives**: Higher mortality risk; insurable at **higher rates**
* **Uninsurable**: Too high risk; uninsurable at any price

Naturally, the higher the risk of the individual, the higher their expected loss and hence higher their premiums.

!!! Info

    Generally speaking, **95% of people are normal or preferred** while the remaining 5% are split between rated & insurable (2-3% each). 

Underwriting is a necessary process to prevent **Adverse Selection**, which occurs when the policyholders use information about themselves (that the insurer does not know) to make decisions at the expense of the insurer.

For instance, high risk individuals may attempt to purchase insurance at lower rates by witholding information. Underwriting allows the insurer to gain more information about the policyholder, preventing them from being taken advantage of.

This is why the **strictness of underwriting** depends on the risk of adverse selection -- policies with higher benefits tend to attract higher risk individuals, which results in stricter underwriting.

When all else fails, most insurance policies have a clause of **Utmost Good Faith**, where the insurer can withold payout if any of the information declared during the underwriting process is found to be **false**.

Rigour of the process depends on the type of insurance being purchasedd
Term more strictly udnerwritten because risk taken by insurer is greater

!!! Info

    There are many other factors such as type of product or distribution that can also affect the strictness.

High risk individuals to apply for insurance with higher DB than lower risk > Typically apply for high risk DB ,thus it scales according

distribution also affects > no medical UW needed, attracts ppl who are unhealthy, which assume heavier mortality
