# **Multi State Applications**

## **Disability Income Insurance**

Disability Income Insurance (DII) is a contract that pays out **routine benefits** to the insured **for as long** as they are **unable to work due to a disability** ("Unhealthy"). The primary purpose of DII is to **replace a portion of the income** of the insured while they are unable to work.

### **Product Features**

**Premiums** are usually non-guaranteed and level throughout the policy term, **payable regularly** as long as the insured is **healthy**.

**Benefits** are **payable regularly** while the insured is **unhealthy**, till the end of the benefit term or till the insured recovers (**whichever comes first**). There is typically a **waiting period** which is the minimum amount of time that must pass **since becoming disabled** before a benefit is paid out.

!!! Note

    The **Off Period** is the duration of time that must elapsed **between** claims for each claim to be treated as **seperate instances** of disability.

    This understanding is important as the benefit term is the **maximum** amount of time that benefits are payable for **each** disability. If the claims are treated as the same instance, they would count towards the same benefit term and potentially receive fewer benefit payments.

    The Off Period is counted from the **END** of the first disability period; when they stop receiving benefits (due to recovering or the benefit term ending).

    <!-- Self Made -->

The **magnitude of benefit** is dependent on the type of coverage purchased. The more likely the coverage is to be claimed, the lower the benefit:

* **Total Disability**: Unable to perform *any* job; unable to earn any income
* **Partial Disability**: Unable to perform *own* job; unable to earn original income
* Benefits for partial disability (own job) are smaller than total disability (any job)

!!! Note

    The magnitude is also affected by other minor factors such as **Inflation** or whether or not the insured is receiving **other forms of income**.

    Regardless, benefits are **intentionally only a fraction** of the original income (50-70%) to incentivize the insured to make a full recovery and return back to work.

## **Long Term Care Insurance**

Long Term Care Insurance (LTCI) is a contract that pays out **routine benefits** to the insured **for as long** as they **cannot live independently**, requiring long term care. LTCI is a form of **health insurance** whose primary purpose is to **cover the costs** of administering LTC, such as nursing homes.

### **Product Features**

Similar to DII, **Premiums** are usually non-guaranteed and level throughout the policy term, **payable regularly** as long as the insured is **healthy**.


definition is ADL, need about 2-3

Off period

Reimburse vs annuity

### **Hybrid Features**

ROP
Accelerating

## **Continuing Care Retirement Communities**

One example of LTC is a **Continuing Care Retirement Community** (CCRC). They are residential facilities dedicated to providing care to seniors of *varying needs*.


## **Critical Illness Insurance**

Critical Illness Insurance (CII) is a contract that pays out a **lump sum** benefit to the insured upon being diagnosed with a **critical illness**.

Similar to life insurance, the primary purpose of CII is to **replace the income** of the insured as they are unable to work while they are recovering from CI.

## Product Features

## Hybrid Features

## **Structured Settlements**

Structured Settlements are an arrangement in a **liability case**, where the **Responsible Party** (RP) must compensate the **Injured Party** (IP).

The compensation typically includes a **Lump Sum** portion to cover immediate losses and an **annuity** portion to cover the potential loss of income or rehabilitation costs as a result of the accident.

!!! Note

    The compensation schedule is usually determined by the RP’s **Liability Insurance** policy.
    
    The RP could either be another person (EG. Motor Insurance) or could be a corporation (EG. Worker’s Compensation).
    
 







